docs(admin-guide): add basicAuth troubleshooting page (#2835)
kestra-io/docs: content/docs/09.administrator-guide/basic-auth-troubleshooting.md

---

> title: Basic Authentication Troubleshooting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Troubleshooting Basic Authentication
```

icon: /docs/icons/faq.svg
---

> Troubleshoot any issues with Basic Authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Troubleshoot issues with Basic Authentication.
```

## Troubleshooting Scenarios

> As of Kestra 0.24, Kestra requires basic authentication (username and password) when starting up an open-source instance. The credentials are set in the Kestra configuration file under `basicAuth`. The default configuration typically includes something like the following with default values for `username` and `password`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from version 0.24, each open-source instance of Kestra requires basic authentication (`username` and `password`). The credentials can be configured from the Setup Page in the UI or you can set them manually in the Kestra configuration file under `basicAuth` (recommended fro production):
```

```yaml
server:
  basicAuth:

>     enabled: false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    username: admin@kestra.io
    password: Admin1234
```

> Now that basic authentication is required, the `enabled` flag is ignored, and credentials are necessary to log in to Kestra. For new users, simply specify your preferred credentials in your configuration file (make sure to enter a valid email address), and start Kestra. You can also start Kestra with no credentials provided in the configuration file, and then you will be prompted to create a user at startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that basic authentication is required, the `enabled` flag is ignored (ideally don't use it anymore), and credentials must be set in order to interact with Kestra UI or API. For new users, simply follow the Setup Page that will show up when you start Kestra UI. 

For production deployments, we recommend setting a valid email address and a strong password in the configuration file.
```

If you're upgrading to version 0.24, there are three possible scenarios for existing users.

### Scenario 1: The `enabled` flag is set to `true`

```yaml
server:
  basicAuth:
    enabled: true
    username: admin@kestra.io
    password: Admin1234
```
In this case, the following will occur:
- The `enabled` flag will be ignored regardless of `true` or `false`, as authentication is required.
- The user Setup page **will not** appear when starting Kestra because `username` and `password` are set. You will be prompted to login with those credentials.
- If `username` or `password` is missing, Kestra will start with the Setup page instead, and there will be a prompt to create a username and password. These credentials will be how you log in for future sessions.

> - If `username` or `password` is invalid, Kestra will show and error and prompt you to update the credentials to valid values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If `username` or `password` is invalid, Kestra will show an error and prompt you to update the credentials to valid values.
```

### Scenario 2: The `enabled` flag is set to `false`

```yaml
server:
  basicAuth:
    enabled: false
```

In this case, the following will occur:
- The `enabled` flag will be ignored, as basic authentication is now required.
- The Setup page will appear the first time starting Kestra, and you will need to create valid credentials. The authentication credentials are stored in your Kestra database in the **Settings** table under the key `kestra.server.basic-auth`. This is how you log in for all future sessions.

### Scenario 3: No `basicAuth` configuration is added

If there is no `basicAuth` set in the configuration file then:
- The Setup page will appear the first time starting Kestra, and you will need to create valid credentials. The authentication credentials are stored in your Kestra database in the **Settings** table under the key `kestra.server.basic-auth`. This is how you log in for all future sessions.

::alert{type="info"}

> For all users, if you forget your credentials, you can always update `username` and `password` in the configuration file, as the configuration file will always take precedence over the values stored in your Kestra database after the Setup page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all users, if you forget your credentials, you can always update `username` and `password` in the configuration file, as the configuration file will always take precedence over the values configured from the Setup page.
```
